JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
new revelations about a former
Soviet counterintelligence
officer joining the meeting
between Donald Trump Jr.
and a Russian lawyer.
Then, we continue our series
Inside Putin's Russia with a
look at the complex relationship
between the U.S. and Russia,
and what could change
under a Trump presidency.
And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David
Brooks are here to analyze
a full week of news.
Plus, we head to Denmark, where
music lovers follow the sound
of improvisation to the world's
largest jazz festival.
CURTIS STIGERS, Musician: We
are the red headed stepchild
of the music business.
We are a niche market.
But the people that love jazz,
they're willing to pay, they're
willing to suffer a little
bit to hear this music.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The week is
ending the way it began,
with new disclosures
about the president's
son and his meeting
with a Russian lawyer.
It turns out at least one
more person was at that
session than previously known.
John Yang begins our coverage.
JOHN YANG: President Trump
returned from his quick Paris
trip to face new questions about
whether his campaign
sought damaging information
on Hillary Clinton from
the Russian government.
Among the uncertainties?
How many people were at the June
2016 meeting at Trump Tower?
Today, a new name emerged,
Rinat Akhmetshin, a Russian-born
Washington lobbyist and Soviet
army veteran.
He met with Donald Trump Jr.,
Trump son-in-law Jared Kushner,
campaign chairman Paul Manafort,
Russian lawyer Natalia
Veselnitskaya, music
promoter Rob Goldstone,
an acquaintance of
the younger Trump who
helped set up the session,
and an interpreter.
Donald Trump Jr. had not
disclosed the additional people.
SEAN HANNITY, Host, "Hannity":
So, as far as you know, as far
as this incident is concerned,
this is all of it?
DONALD TRUMP JR., Son of Donald
Trump: This is everything.
This is everything.
JOHN YANG: It's also not
clear just when President
Trump was told of the meeting.
This week, he told Reuters
that he had only learned of it
just two or three days before
that.
But aboard Air Force One on
his way to Paris, the told
reporters, in fact, maybe it was
mentioned at some point.
Kushner has revised his security
clearance disclosure form
at least three times to add
as many of 100 more
foreign contacts.
That's drawing the ire
of Democrats like House
Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi.
REP.
NANCY PELOSI (D-CA), House
Minority Leader: I also called
for the revoking of the security
clearance of Jared Kushner.
It's absolutely ridiculous that
he should have that clearance.
JOHN YANG: And Mr. Trump is
adding to his legal team.
Washington attorney Ty Cobb
becomes special counsel to
the president and will oversee
the legal and media response
to the Russia investigation.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm John Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For more, we're
now joined by Julie Pace.
She's the Washington bureau
chief for the Associated Press,
and she took part in a phone
conversation with Rinat
Akhmetshin earlier today.
Julie, thank you very
much for talking with us.
So, Julie, what is known
about Rinat Akhmetshin?
JULIE PACE, Associated Press:
Well, Rinat is a person who
is actually fairly well-known
in Washington.
He's a lobbyist who has worked
on issues with ties to Russia,
a bit of a character, a bit
of a fixer on these
types of issues, not this
sort of backroom, shady
character who doesn't
have a profile.
If you work in these circles
in Washington, he's probably
someone that you have run in
to.
He's been on
Capitol Hill before.
But, despite that, it is
certainly unique that he would
end up in a conference room
at Trump Tower in the middle
of a presidential campaign.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I heard the word
fixer associated with his name.
Why is his name
surfacing only now?
We learned about this
meeting days ago.
JULIE PACE: That is the perfect
question on this, why now?
Why is it that we have
had so many different
explanations about the
purpose of this meeting
and the participants
of this meeting?
It's kind of baffling if
you're thinking about this
from a political strategy.
This is sort of politics 101,
that if you are in a crisis, if
there is something controversial
that's happened, it's best to
get all of the information out.
Take the hit in one lump, as
opposed to dripping that out,
in this case, over the course of
a week.
So, there has been no
explanation as to why
we're just finding out
that he was a participant,
other than the fact that he
was willing to get on the phone
with us today and disclose
this information and talk
to us at some length.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it
sounds like now he is
talking to the press.
Is there anything more to be
learned about this meeting
than what's already said?
JULIE PACE: I think there is.
The big thing that all of
the participants have said is
that in the end, nothing came
out of this meeting.
One of the things that Rinat
told us today, though, is that
the Russian lawyer who was
in the meeting actually showed
up with some documents in hand,
and they were in a plastic
folder.
He professed to not know the
content of those documents.
I think that that's one
question that we need to answer.
What were those documents, who
were they specifically given to,
who took them out of the room?
But, more broadly, I
think that it's worth
pressing participants
in this meeting about
whether anything did
come out of this.
Given the fact that
the explanations have
changed so much, I really
don't think we should
be taking explanations on
face value at this point.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Julie,
there's also this question now
-- and we heard it mentioned
in the report -- when
President Trump himself
learned about the meeting.
Initially, it was that he had
just learned about it a few
days ago, but then I guess
he said something different
in that conversation
with reporters.
JULIE PACE: I think this is --
again, timelines keep shifting
when it comes to this meeting.
What the president initially
said is that he only knew about
it two or three days before.
One of the reasons why there are
so many questions about this,
though, is that Jared Kushner
and his advisers said
that this is something
that they discovered
and put on a disclosure
form a few weeks ago.
So, this was known to people
in the White House prior to
this past weekend, when the
reporting started to come out.
And given the closeness of the
president to his family, and
given the fact that the Russian
investigations and every
little detail about
these investigations
is so critical right
now, it is hard to imagine that
this is something that would
be kept from the president for
so long.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So,
finally, Julie, you
mentioned Jared Kushner.
There have been a number of
stories this week about turmoil,
ongoing turmoil inside the
White House, fingers pointing
in different directions, and
some of the White House staffing
being upset with Jared Kushner.
What is that about?
JULIE PACE: Well, this has
become a bit of pattern
for this White House.
When something goes
wrong, you start having
people turn on each other.
The finger-pointing
gets pretty intense.
And, in this case, you have a
situation where you have someone
like Jared Kushner, who is
a senior adviser to the
president, but operates
in pretty rarefied
territory because he's
also family.
He is the one person whose
name has come up in relation to
the Russia investigations who
is currently sitting
in the West Wing.
And for some of the folks who
are in there right now, the fact
that he is in that situation
and still remains a
protected adviser, it's
pretty irritating to them.
And they worry about their
interactions with him.
Whenever you have a special
counsel investigation
that revolves around
the White House, you
have staffers that have
to get lawyers, staffers
that are pretty --
staffers that are fairly
well-paid having to get
pretty expensive lawyers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
JULIE PACE: This is not
a comfortable situation
for anybody in there.
And Jared Kushner, given his
relationship and his position
in the West Wing, is taking
a lot of the heat internally.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meantime,
we have seen some
Democrats on Capitol
Hill, some of them saying
he should step down, others
saying he should have his
security clearance taken away.
Julie Pace with the Associated
Press, we thank you.
JULIE PACE: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in the day's
other news: The U.S. military
announced the death of Abu
Sayed, head of the Islamic
State group in Afghanistan.
It happened Tuesday in a drone
strike on ISIS headquarters in
Kunar Province in Northeastern
Afghanistan.
A Pentagon statement says
that several other militants
were killed as well.
At least seven people died
today in Egypt in a pair of
attacks that bore the hallmarks
of Islamist militants.
Five policemen were killed in
a shooting south of Cairo near
some of the country's famed
pyramids.
Later, two German tourists
were stabbed to death and four
others wounded at a Red Sea
resort hotel.
In Jerusalem, Arab attackers
struck at Israeli police today
in one of the holiest sites of
both Islam and Judaism.
Three gunmen killed two
police officers before
being shot dead themselves.
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner has the story.
MARGARET WARNER: A security
camera captured the opening
of the assault, gunmen coming
from behind to attack
two Israeli officers,
then, a running gun
battle, seen on cell phone
video.
Police gave chase, and one
attacker jumped up and lunged
at an officer before being shot
himself.
MAN: We can confirm that
there was a terrorist
attack that took place.
Three terrorists used an
automatic weapon and a knife
in and around in the area.
MARGARET WARNER: All this at
the holiest site in Jerusalem,
the Temple Mount to Jews, the
Noble Sanctuary to Muslims.
The ancient complex includes
the Dome of the Rock and Al-Aqsa
Mosque, and the Western Wall
surrounding part of it.
All three assailants
were identified as Arab
citizens of Israel.
Relatives say they
were devout Muslims who
frequented the area often.
Israel police quickly closed
the site, a move rarely taken
since the Six-Day War in 1967,
when the Israelis captured
East Jerusalem and its
Old City from Jordan.
Previous closures have provoked
rioting by Palestinians.
Today, Muslims had to pray
outside the shrine after the
closure canceled noon prayers at
Al-Aqsa.
The grand mufti of Jerusalem
had called for Palestinians
to defy the closure.
MAN (through translator): We
have to enter the mosque to
attend the Friday prayers.
Al-Aqsa Mosque is our mosque,
so it is not allowed, under any
circumstances, to be prevented
from reaching the mosque.
MARGARET WARNER: Israeli
police detained the
Mufti for several hours.
Palestinian President Mahmoud
Abbas telephoned Israeli Prime
Minister Netanyahu to condemn
the attack.
But he also called for
reopening the holy site.
Seeking to ease tensions,
Netanyahu quickly issued a
statement that the status quo on
access to the site
will be preserved.
But the leader of the militant
Islamic Jihad movement in
Gaza City welcomed the attack.
MAN (through translator):
Jerusalem is an Arab and Islamic
land, so when the Zionist
enemy seeks to turn it into
a Jewish temple, one of our
people will come out and stand
in the face of this
plan and confront it
as it happened today.
MARGARET WARNER: In the end,
Israelis and Palestinians
were left to bury their dead
amid fears that the
attack is a harbinger of
more violence to come.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Margaret Warner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in
this country, the U.S.
Justice Department says
that it will appeal
directly to the Supreme
Court, after a federal
judge dealt another blow
to President Trump's
travel ban.
The judge in Hawaii
ruled last night.
He said the list of bona
fide relationships that allow
entry to the U.S. must include
grandparents, among others.
A federal appeals court ruled
today that county commissioners
in North Carolina violated the
Constitution by starting
meetings with Christian prayers.
The Fourth Circuit case
is also likely headed
for the Supreme Court.
The ruling says prayers
at public meetings are not
inherently unconstitutional.
But, in this case,
no prayers from other
faiths were permitted.
President Trump today
pushed Senate Republicans
today to approve a
revamped health care bill.
In a tweet, he said -- quote --
"Republican senators must come
through as they have promised."
Already, Rand Paul and
Susan Collins have said
that they will vote no.
That means GOP leaders cannot
afford to lose another vote.
The president spent much of
his day taking part in France's
celebration of independence.
This year, Bastille
Day coincided with the
100th anniversary of
America's entry into
World War I. Mr. Trump
joined President Emmanuel
Macron at a military
parade in Paris, complete
with a flyover.
Macron thanked the U.S. for
its role in what the French
commonly call the great war.
EMMANUEL MACRON, French
President (through
translator): We have
also found sure allies,
friends who have
come to our aid.
The United States of
America is one of them.
That is why nothing
will ever separate us.
The presence today of the
American president by my side,
Mr. Donald Trump, and his wife
is a sign of friendship
which has endured time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Macron
later traveled to Nice,
France, to mark one year
since a terror attack
there killed 86 people.
Former President Jimmy Carter
is back building houses, after
being released from a hospital
in Canada.
He became dehydrated yesterday
while working on a project
for Habitat for Humanity.
Today, he returned to the
work site in Winnipeg,
Manitoba, smiling and
wearing work clothes.
Mr. Carter is 92 years old.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial average gained
84 points to close at 21637,
a new record.
The Nasdaq rose 38 points.
And the S&P 500 added 11, also
reaching a new record high.
For the week, the Dow and
the S&P were up 1 percent.
The Nasdaq gained 2.6 percent.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Inside Putin's Russia, a look
at the evolving relationship
between Russia and the U.S.;
the legacy of Liu Xiaobo, the
Chinese dissident who died
in government custody; Mark
Shields and David Brooks take
on a full week of news; and much
more.
Now we continue our series
Inside Putin's Russia.
There may be no more
consequential relationship
for the United States
than with Russia.
Both nations possess
world-ending capacity,
and may be at the most
critical moment since
the end of the Cold War.
Tonight, we explore the
bilateral relationship,
the tension and how
Russians see the United
States.
Again in partnership with
the Pulitzer Center on Crisis
Reporting, special correspondent
Nick Schifrin and producer
Zach Fannin start their report
in Moscow on Victory Day.
NICK SCHIFRIN: On Russia's most
patriotic holiday, Russians
of all ages remember what
they consider their
finest moment.
They mark the anniversary
of victory in World War
II by honoring the dead.
Kiriginov Naimovich's
grandfather fought the Nazis.
He says Russia and the
U.S. were once allies,
and should be again.
KIRIGINOV NAIMOVICH, Russia
(through translator): We really
want to love you and be friends
with you.
We are waiting for you to
finally meet us halfway.
NICK SCHIFRIN: For Russians,
it's the U.S. who's
unwilling to come halfway.
Many here believe President
Trump wants to improve things,
but is being blocked by what
Dimitry Schyukin calls the
American establishment.
DIMITRY SCHYUKIN, Russia
(through translator):
Trump wants to do
something, but he's forced
to follow the general
political line.
ALEXANDER DUGIN, TV Host: Donald
Trump is the most right-wing
candidate of the Republican
Party.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Perhaps
nobody expressed more hope
in Trump than Alexander
Dugin, a right-wing
TV firebrand and philosopher
who's helped inspire
the Kremlin's ideology.
ALEXANDER DUGIN: Really,
we supported Trumpism.
We supported agenda.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Dugin says
the Kremlin saw Trump as a
kindred spirit who vowed not to
meddle internationally.
ALEXANDER DUGIN: We
supported this choice
of anti-establishment
conservative American
revolution.
NICK SCHIFRIN: That changed
when President Trump ordered a
missile strike on Russia ally
Syria, and said he
felt must respond to a
chemical weapons attack.
DONALD TRUMP, President of
the United States: As long as
America stands for justice, then
peace and harmony will
in the end prevail.
ALEXANDER DUGIN: We trusted not
in Trump as pro-Russian figure.
We trusted in Trump realist.
And we are disappointed.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The
disappointment and
tensions have been growing.
Last month, over the Baltic
Sea, a Russian jet flew within
five feet of a U.S. Air Force
reconnaissance plane.
That same week, a NATO
jet shadowed the Russian
defense minister's
plane and a Russian jet
came up and rocked its wings
to demonstrate it was armed.
Last year, the Obama
administration accused
Russia of hacking the
election, and then seized
Russian properties and
increased sanctions.
All of that has led to
Russian frustration.
Maria Zakharova is the
Foreign Ministry spokeswoman.
MARIA ZAKHAROVA, Russian Foreign
Ministry Spokeswoman: We were
trying to establish normal
relationship, normal.
Do you know this word,
normal relationship?
What is wrong with this?
DONALD TRUMP: President Putin
and I have been discussing
various things, and I think it's
going very well.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Last
week, the U.S. took steps
toward normalization.
Presidents Trump and Putin
announced a deal on Syria.
Both presidents called their
meeting the first step to
warming the relationship.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through translator):
If we develop our relations in
the same way, there is every
reason to believe that we would
be able to at least partially
restore the level of
interaction that we need.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The
president echoed that hope.
On Sunday, he tweeted he
wouldn't dwell on 2016 hacking,
and wrote, "Now was the time
to move forward in working
constructively with Russia."
This is not the language other
Trump administration officials
use about Russia on Syria.
NIKKI HALEY, U.S. Ambassador
to the United Nations: How
many more children have to die
before Russia cares?
NICK SCHIFRIN: On Ukraine.
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary
of State: We do call on Russia
to exercise influence over
the separatists in the
region, whom they do hold
complete control over.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And
on Putin personally.
MIKE POMPEO, CIA Director:
This is a man for whom veracity
doesn't translate into English.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The one senior
administration official who's
declined to echo that criticism
is Donald Trump, as
candidate and president.
DONALD TRUMP: Wouldn't it
be a great thing if we could
actually get along with Russia?
Wouldn't that be a good thing?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: I respect Putin.
He is a strong leader,
I can tell you that,
unlike what we have.
We have a pathetic leader.
QUESTION: Putin is a killer.
DONALD TRUMP: There
are a lot of killers.
We have a lot of killers.
What, you think our
country is so innocent?
NICK SCHIFRIN: And last
week in Warsaw, President
Trump once again questioned
the U.S. intelligence
community's unanimous
assessment that Russia
hacked the 2016 election.
DONALD TRUMP: I
think it was Russia.
But I think it was probably
other people and/or
countries, and I see
nothing wrong with that
statement.
Nobody really knows.
SEN.
MARK WARNER (D), Virginia:
At the very least, giving the
president all the benefit of the
doubt, this is very
bizarre behavior.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Democratic
Senator Mark Warner is
the vice chairman of
the Senate Intelligence
Committee.
SEN.
MARK WARNER: We are seeking
to determine if there is an
actual fire, but there's clearly
a lot of smoke.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Warner is helping
lead the Senate's investigation
into Russia's interference
in the 2016 election and
whether President Trump or his
campaign colluded with Russia's
attempts to sway the election.
We first interviewed
him three weeks ago.
SEN.
MARK WARNER: It is very strange
that any presidential candidate,
and in particular a Republican
presidential candidate,
would parrot so much
of the Russian line.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Republican
Senator James Lankford is also
on the Intelligence Committee.
In some ways, has President
Trump aligned himself with the
ideals expressed by Russia?
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD (R),
Oklahoma: Yes, he's
pushing out some messages
that are consistent with
the Kremlin policies.
And I would tell you, at every
opportunity that I have, I
try to articulate very clearly
there's no question that the
Russians were trying to hack
into our elections, and there's
no question that we should
have a strong NATO and that the
United States should be a part
of that NATO alliance.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Do you
believe that he's not
echoing that because the
Russians have compromising
material on him?
SEN.
MARK WARNER: I don't know.
I hope not.
But the goal of this
investigation is to not
only reconfirm Russian
intervention and explain
that to the American public,
but to also see if there were
any contacts between the Trump
campaign and the Russians.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And just this
week, we learned that, last
June, Donald Trump Jr. met with
lawyer Natalia Veselnitskaya
and lobbyist Rinat Akhmetshin,
both believed to have ties
to the Russian government.
I spoke to Senator
Warner again last night.
SEN.
MARK WARNER: This indication
that they were willing to accept
this information from Russians
and it was part of an overall
Russian government effort to
help Trump and to hurt Clinton,
I think this is the first
time the American public has
seen that in black and white.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Much of this
town has been worried about
Trump and Russia since he became
president.
Current administration officials
tell "NewsHour" the White House
drafted an executive order
that would have lifted sanctions
imposed on Russia over Ukraine.
Senior administration officials
and the intelligence community
successfully lobbied against it.
And, this spring,
senators passed a bill
that would restrict the
president's ability to
lift those sanctions.
The bill's not yet a law,
but it was designed to
be a nearly unanimous
message to the president
and to Putin.
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: We
believe strongly that
what Russia continues to
do to be able to threaten
Ukraine, threaten its neighbors,
threaten NATO, to continue
to pry into not only our
elections, but other
elections, is destabilizing,
and it demands a response.
They have yet to have a
consequence to what they
did in the election time.
And they should.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In some ways, the
president has fallen in line.
On Sunday, he tweeted he
wouldn't lift sanctions
on Russia over Ukraine
until Ukrainian and
Syrian problems are solved.
And last week, he also
endorsed Article 5,
NATO's collective defense.
DONALD TRUMP: The United States
has demonstrated not merely with
words, but with its actions,
that we stand firmly
behind Article 5, the
mutual defense commitment.
NICK SCHIFRIN: That convinces
many in Moscow that the U.S.
establishment is making sure
the U.S. remains anti-Russian.
Dmitri Trenin is a former Soviet
army colonel who directs the
Carnegie Center in Moscow.
DMITRI TRENIN, Former Soviet
Army Colonel: The United States
has been, remains, and will
be the power that defines common
Western, i.e., U.S.-driven,
foreign, defense and security
policy.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And given that,
Trenin says the U.S. remains
Russia's main adversary.
And Russia is simply
targeting the U.S. with
whatever tool it can.
DMITRI TRENIN: I'm sure that
the Russians have been looking
at things, have been hacking
things, have been using the
material that they have hacked.
Why are you surprised
that you are being hacked?
This is a method of espionage.
This is what you do.
If you can do it, do it.
If you can protect against
that, protect against
it, but don't whine.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But it
goes one step further.
Many in Russia look at
Washington's turbulence
and see a U.S. they'd
considered strong and
unified suddenly weakened.
And they're exploiting that
weakness in the U.S. foundation.
ALEXANDER DUGIN: It
is not so coherent.
It is not so stable.
And it is vulnerable,
I would say.
And we seen that.
We have seen what we needed
to see, vulnerability
of American society.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Nick
now joins me in our studio.
So, Nick, that sounds
pretty foreboding.
NICK SCHIFRIN: I think it should
sound foreboding, because it is.
I think usual Russians really do
see a vulnerability in the U.S.
They see a lack of unity.
And when talking frankly to
people who actually know what
they're talking about in Russia,
it's not so much denial
that they did it.
It is that we did it in the
United States last year,
and we will keep doing it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, from talking
to them, is there any doubt
that they are going to keep
on doing it?
NICK SCHIFRIN: No, I don't think
so, mostly because they don't
feel like they paid a price.
The Russian government doesn't
feel like the United States
government really penalized
them for what
happened last year.
And, frankly, a lot of
American officials here in
Washington agree with that.
They fault the Obama
administration and the
Trump administration
for simply not following
through on some of the things
that they feel like Russia
should have paid for what they
did last year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, you and I
talked a little bit about this.
You talked to so many experts.
Is there hope?
Is there a glimmer of
a belief anywhere that
this can be repaired?
NICK SCHIFRIN: There
are analysts in Moscow
who think the only thing
we can hope is that
we avoid war.
I mean, there are some people
who are that dire right now.
I think the people who are
trying to make it better and
hope it can make it better are
doing what basically President
Trump and Putin did earlier in
that story we showed, trying
to find a lowest common
denominator, if you will, trying
to find a corner of Syria, for
example, where they can work
together and use that very
small deal to expand perhaps
into greater Syria, to
expand into a kind of
warming of the relationship.
And certainly the people
who understand that
this relationship has
to get better, that's
what they're trying to do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, looking for
places to make that happen.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Absolutely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nick
Schifrin, thank you.
It is a remarkable series.
Thank you very much.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Thanks very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you call
watch all of Nick's reports from
this week's series on our Web
site.
That's PBS.org/NewsHour.
The Nobel Peace Prize laureate
Liu Xiaobo died yesterday in
China of liver cancer after
years behind bars
for his efforts to
democratize his homeland.
Liu's work and his
plight brought him global
attention, work that enraged
the Chinese government.
His death brought an
outpouring of tributes.
William Brangham has this look
at Liu Xiaobo's life and legacy.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: From Hong
Kong to Sydney and around the
world, there have been vigils
overnight and today.
John Kamm runs a human rights
organization based in San
Francisco that advocates for
political prisoners in China.
JOHN KAMM, The Dui
Hua Foundation: A
great loss for China.
Someone who was committed to
nonviolent change is gone.
And it's a great
loss for the world.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: He'd been
released from prison on medical
leave only a few weeks earlier,
but supporters say he
was denied proper care.
WU'ER KAIXI, Exiled
Chinese dissident:
The Chinese government
brutally killed my teacher
and one of the most
genuine and conscientious
Chinese in the world.
I would like to ask the world,
world leaders and people around
the world, which side are
you on?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: President
Trump praised Liu in a
statement yesterday, calling him
a poet, scholar, and
courageous advocate.
China's government flatly
denies Liu was mistreated,
and, today, a spokesman
condemned the international
criticisms.
GENG SHUANG, Chinese Foreign
Ministry Spokesperson
(through translator):
Those statements are
interference to China's
judicial sovereignty
and domestic affairs.
Liu Xiaobo is a criminal who was
put on trial by China's laws.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For decades,
Liu was one of the Chinese
government's most outspoken
critics.
He rose to prominence during the
1989 Tiananmen Square protests,
returning from the U.S. to
support the original
student demonstrators.
After troops opened fire killing
hundreds, perhaps thousands,
Liu helped negotiate safe
passage for the survivors.
He remained in China
despite detention and
constant surveillance and
continued his political
advocacy.
In 2008, he helped author
Charter 08, a manifesto
demanding political
and civil reform, and
he was sentenced to 11 years
in prison for subversion.
JOHN KAMM: Ten thousand
people signed that petition.
He is the only one to have
been sentenced to prison.
So, I think he
sacrificed there, too.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But the
case gained international
attention, and, in 2010,
over China's vehement
objections, Liu was awarded
the Nobel Peace Prize.
Stuck in prison, Liu was unable
to attend the Nobel ceremony,
so a chair was left empty
in Oslo.
And a statement he had
written for his trial was
used as his Nobel lecture.
"Hatred can rot a person's
wisdom and conscience," it said.
Still, Beijing's hard line on
Liu makes clear that the reforms
he sought for decades appear
increasingly out of reach.
JOHN KAMM: There's a
major party meeting
coming up in a few months.
The government and its president
and Chairman Xi Jinping will
be inclined to be very, very
tough.
In terms of changing
China's political system,
I don't see it, I'm afraid.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
focus turns now to
Liu's wife, Liu Xia.
She remains under house arrest.
And calls for her release,
including from the
secretary of state, have
so far gone unheeded.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm William Brangham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
we travel to one of the
world's largest jazz festivals
in Denmark; and a view on how
school choice has evolved from
the pressures of parenting.
But first to the analysis
of Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and New York
Times columnist David Brooks.
Welcome, gentlemen.
So, Mark, welcome back.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We
missed you last week.
The Donald Trump Jr. story.
We have now learned that he
had a meeting a year ago,
Trump Tower, with a lawyer who
had some connection to
the Russian government.
How does this change our
understanding of the Russia
collusion allegation?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I think
it's fair to say, Judy, that
the White House lost any benefit
of the doubt that it
could claim on this story.
The shoes continue to drop,
like it's a Zappos warehouse
or Imelda Marcos' closet.
I mean, it just -- each time,
they're amending their story,
they're appending or extending
their story.
And so I just think the fact
that there were such denials
and accusations of a Democratic
plot, all of those are gone,
and they stand naked and
they stand exposed as shams.
I mean, they were actively
engaged, at least welcoming
Russian involvement in the 2016
election, in behalf of Donald
Trump against Hillary Clinton.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, does
this change your assessment of
what may have been going on?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
My colleague Ross Douthat wrote
that any time you give Donald
Trump the benefit of the doubt,
he always lets you down.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: And that's true.
That's true for his business
clients and it's true for those
of us who thought, they couldn't
have been some stupid, to
walk right into collusion
with the Russian meetings.
And yet they were not only that
stupid, but I think what is
striking to me is the complete
amorality of it, that Donald
Trump Jr. gets an e-mail saying
the Russian government is
offering you this, and
he says, "I love it."
And it reminded me so much
of some of the e-mails that
came out of the Jack Abramoff
scandal, that came out of the
financial crisis scandal, where
they're just -- they're like
frat boys who are gleefully
going against the law and are
going against all morality.
And they're not even overcoming
any scruples to do this.
They're just having fun with it.
And then, in the days since,
we have had on - - Donald Jr.
on Sean Hannity's show, again,
I did nothing wrong, just
incapable of seeing that there
might have been something wrong
about colluding with a foreign
power who is hostile with you.
And then Donald Trump himself
saying, he's a wonderful guy,
again, not seeing anything
wrong, and then even last day
lying about how many people were
in the meeting, a completely
inconsequential lie.
And so we're trapped in the
zone just beyond any ethical
scruple, where it's all about
winning.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Beyond any
ethical scruple, Mark,
is that where we are?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, I think
it's fair to say that
Donald Trump was born
without the embarrassment
gene or the moral
reservation gene.
He just -- he doesn't --
when he says that most people
would take that meeting, Judy,
I mean, this is not -- I have
been around for a while, and
been to the Dallas Fair twice,
and all the rest of it.
People wouldn't do that.
In 2000, Al Gore's campaign
got ahold of, was delivered
George Bush's briefing book.
They turned it over to the FBI.
That's what you do when
you're honorable in politics.
This isn't a meeting
with a foreign power.
This isn't Canada or the
Swiss Family Robinson.
This is Russia.
This is a country that has
supported, propped up the worst
of anti-democratic regimes in
the Middle East, that has
practiced -- mistreated
its own press, mistreated
its own civil society,
and economic intimidation
of its neighbors, including
invasion of its neighbors.
I mean, this is the one country
on the face of the earth with
the capacity to obliterate
the United States.
This is serious stuff.
And to do it so casually and,
as David said, without moral
reservation, is -- I guess it
should be stunning,
but, sadly, it isn't.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But some of the
Trump team, David, in their
response to this are sounding
almost offended that people
would even think that they
were doing something wrong.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, well, they
just don't -- they don't get it.
My pal Mike Gerson had a good
line in his column today.
If you make losing a sin, you
make cheating a sacrament.
And that is true.
If it's all win-loss, then
you do whatever you can to win
and to make money and to beat
the deal.
And so I do think you have
entered the zone where they
don't quite see what they have
done wrong.
But cheating with a foreign
company -- country is -- as Mark
keeps saying, is a grave sin.
And then there's just the
scandal management of it, of
letting it drip out, letting it
drip out today and
today and today.
And then there is almost just
a cluelessness like a color
blindness about how the rest
of the world is going
to go react to this.
And this has been a leitmotif
for the Trump administration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It is the case,
Mark, that there was one version
we heard over the weekend,
and then, on Monday, there was
a little bit more, and then
Tuesday, Wednesday, then today
still another.
MARK SHIELDS: Mm-hmm.
No, it is, Judy.
And I don't know what to think.
I mean, drip, drip, drip,
comes a downpour at some point.
How about the disparaging of
the United States intelligence
agencies and professionals by
President Trump, candidate Trump
and now President Trump, whether
Russia -- you know, I can't
be sure Russia was involved.
Yes, probably, but not for sure.
I mean, here they are, the Trump
Tower with the people, their
names approved on the visitors
list for the meeting in the
Trump Tower, and pretending
they didn't know it.
So, no, it's -- David is right.
In a management sense, it's
just been incredible, Judy.
Apparently, it's hit the
president or someone has
gotten to the president,
because his statement
about his son was so
sort of homogenized,
he's a quality person.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He
said he's a good boy.
MARK SHIELDS: Good boy,
and praised him for
his transparency, which
is a little bit like,
as I'm about to be indicted
for tax evasion, say, well, I
want to make something clear.
I failed to pay my taxes.
DAVID BROOKS: It does open
up a bunch of questions,
like what were the -- this
-- as the intelligence
experts keep saying, this looked
like a Russian feeler operation.
They just wanted to see
what kind of reaction they
could get from Donald Jr.
And if they -- how do they
respond to the signal?
And so what else did they do?
There must have been
other things they did.
The second, was it connected?
Donald Trump, as others have
cited, gave a speech in which
he said, we're about to have
a big set of revelations
about Hillary Clinton.
Did that flow out
of this meeting?
And what was the timing of that?
Who else was in this meeting?
What actually was
said in the meeting?
We still really -- we have some
testimonies, but what documents
were brought to the meeting?
It means there's another
several weeks of questions.
And it gives Bob Mueller a
new channel to walk down.
It's just expanding.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The
special counsel.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
MARK SHIELDS: I would just say
one thing about Mr. Mueller.
He has an advantage and a
power that nobody else, that
none of us in the press has.
He has the power of subpoena.
And he has the power
of a grand jury.
And he has the alternative
of indictment for perjury.
So, you just can't keep
changing these stories.
I mean, Jared Kushner now
has amended, as John Yang
pointed out at the beginning of
the show, point, his number
of contacts with foreign
individuals and interests, 100.
Three times, he's
now had to do so.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Added names.
MARK SHIELDS: And it raises
the question, who leaked these
e-mails on Donald Trump -- I
mean, on Donald Trump Jr.?
Did they -- is there mistrust?
There is distrust, I know, in
the White House whether it was
Kushner or Kushner's people,
saying that we had
to get this out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, meantime,
one thing, David, the president
is saying that he wants
the Senate to get done
is health care reform.
So, we now -- a few days ago,
we saw this newest, newer
version of health care reform
that Leader McConnell is saying
that he really, really wants his
troops to come together behind.
But they still aren't there.
What does it look like?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, it's
interesting when you see the
reaction to this latest bill.
Some people say, oh, it
shifted to the right.
Some people say, oh, no,
it shifted to the left.
In reality, it short
of shifted both ways.
It keeps some of the taxes
on the rich, which some
of the moderates want.
It includes some deregulation
of the insurance markets, which
Ted Cruz and Mike Lee and some
of the conservatives want.
So, it sort of moves
in both direction.
And I give Mitch
McConnell credit.
This is an incredibly
unpopular bill.
And it probably couldn't
survive a set of public
hearings and scrutiny.
And yet he's got to the
point where he's kind
of close to getting it.
I don't know if
we will get there.
I sort of would bet against it.
But, as an act of legislative
craftsmanship, if your only
goal is to pass something, then
I would say Mitch McConnell
has done about as well as you
can do by pushing a lot of
different buttons and bringing
people at least within the
ballpark, especially given how
unpopular this is.
I still think it's a bad
bill because it does so
much to punish Medicaid
among a population
that can afford it least.
But just as a set of legislative
craftsmanship, I would say
McConnell is like turning all
the knobs and getting
people sort of close.
I would say maybe 40 percent
chance that he actually
passes something this summer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you think
it will go over the top?
MARK SHIELDS: I don't, Judy.
But I would just point out
Affordable Care Act was being
fought for 18 months in the
Congress.
There was always a public
case you could make for it.
There was much criticism of it,
but the public case included
that women wouldn't be charged
more than men, that nobody
could be denied coverage, that
the preexisting condition,
people would be
guaranteed insurance and
access to health care.
There is -- and the inside
part was done by Harry Reid
in the Senate and Nancy Pelosi
in the House.
This is all inside.
There is no public argument.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
Behind closed doors.
MARK SHIELDS: There is no
public case that can --
Mitch McConnell can make.
There's no public case
addressing the -- you have
two minutes to address
the American people,
why is this better?
Why will this Republican
plan be better for Americans?
Why will it be better for those
who don't have health care?
Why will it be better for the
elderly, for the poor, for
the quality of health care in
the country?
There is no case to be made.
It's all inside baseball.
Can you get Dean Heller
by leaning on Governor
Sandoval in Nevada?
I mean, that is what
it has come down to.
And, to me, that is
a terrible failing.
If somehow they do wrangle
vote, what have they got?
They have got an incredibly
unpopular piece of legislation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is
anybody, David, making a
positive case for this?
DAVID BROOKS: Not really.
They say the insurance markets
are failing, the Obamacare
markets are failing, which is
somewhat true.
They want -- they say we have
to have a more market-driven
system to shove down costs,
which is somewhat true.
And so I think there is a
public case that could be made.
I don't think they're
particularly making it, which
is why it's so unpopular.
But if we had public
scrutiny -- say the insurance
markets -- this thing
called the Cruz amendments
gives the insurance companies
a chance to charge less for
some people if they give a
fuller benefit for another.
And what that will do is,
let's put the insurance markets
into two different systems.
MARK SHIELDS: Exactly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
DAVID BROOKS: And so the
people who are healthy
will be paying a low fee.
And then the people who are
sick would be paying much more.
And so whether you agree or
not with the principle, these
things actually have to work.
And I'm not sure that
the way this is written,
this will actually even
just work as functioning
way to run a market, as the
health insurance companies
have been strongly saying, like
Blue Cross and Blue Shield.
MARK SHIELDS: We're waiting
to find out now whether it's
going to be 19 million or 24
million people who
are going to...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Knocked off.
MARK SHIELDS: Knocked
off health insurance.
I mean, what everyone says
about the Affordable Care Act,
20 million Americans who didn't
have it then did have
health care coverage.
And, Judy, let's be very blunt;
12 million of them came through
the extension of Medicaid.
And this is the starvation of
Medicaid, seven years, 2024,
and the federal support on the
extension of
Medicaid disappears.
And so they can talk about
money and everything else, but
implicit in the Republican bill
is there's a difference in
those who are on Medicaid.
Somehow, they are takers.
Somehow, they are freeloaders.
They're not our fellow Americans
who are struggling to get by.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We are
going to have to leave
it there on that note.
Mark Shields, David
Brooks, thank you both.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Copenhagen
Jazz Festival ends this
weekend in Denmark's capital.
The organizers claim it's the
world's biggest such event,
and that Denmark has now become
the epicenter of global jazz.
Some of the American musicians
there express envy that this
quintessential American music
now thrives abroad, thanks to
Danish government investment.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant is based in Copenhagen
and he brings us all that Danish
jazz.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The streets
and squares are alive to the
sound of improvisation, as the
city stages 1,400 concerts
in 10 days, leading to claims
that Copenhagen is now the jazz
capital of the world.
JORGEN FJELSTRUP, Drummer:
It's a kind of music
you can make swing.
We like the swing feeling,,
so that's how we perform it.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Drummer Jorgen
Fjelstrup fears that, like
Viennese waltzes, traditional
jazz will soon be
consigned to history.
JORGEN FJELSTRUP:
Everything has its time.
I think 5 percent of the people
knows or likes this kind of
jazz, mainly my age I think,
so it will die with us.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But in
Copenhagen's meat-packing
district, the boundaries
of jazz are being
expanded in a way
that's attracting
international attention.
Drummer Emil De Waal.
EMIL DE WAAL, Drummer: To me,
jazz is a very open genre.
To me, jazz is a
very alive genre.
And what we're trying to do
here is to make jazz work
together with electronic music.
I can't see a world without
improvisational music.
So, I'm really optimistic.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Grammy-winning
drummer Victor Jones has joined
a distinguished list of American
musicians who've moved
to Denmark because of
its rich jazz culture.
VICTOR JONES, Drummer: They have
an audience that understands
the music, which in America,
it's pretty difficult to
find an audience like that.
What's good about here is that
they also teach it in school.
In America, they just don't
have it in school and they just
don't have it on TV, so here
I am.
(LAUGHTER)
MALCOLM BRABANT: Six times'
Grammy-winning saxophonist
David Sanborn laments a lack of
investment in a culture
that America invented.
DAVID SANBORN, Saxophonist:
You have a different
dynamic over here.
And in Europe in general,
the arts are funded
by the governments,
which you don't get in
America and even less so now.
So I think that there's
a certain institutional
respect for what this
music means to the world.
Consequently, it fosters
great Danish jazz musicians.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Such as
pianist Niels Lan Doky.
He learned his craft among
legends in New York, and now
runs a successful jazz club
in Copenhagen.
NIELS LAN DOKY, Pianist: In New
York and America in general,
it's difficult to experiment and
develop new products,
because the pressure to
be profitable is so high,
so bottom-line-oriented,
that they need to play it safe,
established names, and you don't
see the kind of experimentation
and diversity that we have here.
MALCOLM BRABANT: In
Denmark, the jazz gene
pool is being revitalized.
Lan Doky's protege, 19-year-old
Amanda Thomsen, has chosen
jazz over other genres.
AMANDA THOMSEN, Musician: Jazz
surprises because, yes, you can
do what you want in jazz and
improvise.
You can create all the time,
so every song is new every day.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Jazz
may be thriving here,
but the common perception
that jazz is incapable
of standing on its own two feet
financially also applies here.
Festival organizers say that
subsidies from central and local
government, as well as private
foundations, are essential,
because, without them, this
festival wouldn't be on such a
grand scale.
Curtis Stigers says that jazz
will always struggle because
its art takes precedence
over commerce.
CURTIS STIGERS, Musician:
I'm very, very, very lucky.
I make a living
playing jazz music.
I have to come to
Europe to do it.
We are the red headed stepchild
of the music business.
We are a niche market.
But the people that love jazz,
they're willing to pay, they're
willing to suffer a little
bit to hear this music
and to support it.
And I'm grateful for that.
Charlie Parker played pop songs.
He just turned them
into jazz tunes.
And that's what we have to do,
as opposed to just listening
to Miles Davis and saying,
that's jazz.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Here's another
dimension, liturgical jazz.
Anders Gadegaard is the dean
of Copenhagen Cathedral.
ANDERS GADEGAARD, Dean,
Copenhagen Cathedral:
When you add this jazz
tone, it becomes much
more vital for people,
and it becomes easier
for us to proclaim the
gospel, so to speak.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The jazz mass
was written by bassist Chris
Minh Doky, brother of the
pianist.
CHRIS MINH DOKY, Bassist: If
you take an old song from the
Danish song tradition that's
300 years old, there's a reason
why it lasted 300 years, because
the melody is really good.
If you just take the melody
and set it free and don't
constrain it in any boxed-in way
and just present it as is, with
a contemporary harmonization
and presentation, you will hear
that this melody is universal.
It's basically the same as
hearing a pop song from the '50s
that turns into a jazz standard.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The claim that
Denmark is the epicenter of
global jazz may be disputed,
but this congregation
proves beyond doubt that
the spirit is strong.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant in Copenhagen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Author Gayle
Tzemach Lemmon usually reports
for us from the other side
of the world, covering
stories such as the refugee
crisis and child marriage.
Tonight, she shares her Humble
Opinion about something closer
to home and much more personal.
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON,
Author: School choice.
Those two words spark a whole
host of emotions from people
across the political spectrum.
As a kid, I never heard the
words school choice uttered.
But they did indeed
shape my childhood.
You see, my mom was a single
mom, a union Democrat who worked
at the phone company during
the day and sold tupperware at
night, at least on the nights
when she wasn't studying for
her college degree.
She frequented yard sales,
grocery-shopped with double
coupons, and knew her way around
the Marshalls layaway window.
And she lied about our address,
so that I could attend what
she judged to be the best
public elementary
school in our area.
In a number of states,
that is seen as a felony.
In fact, parents across the
country regularly face jail
time and huge fines for what my
mom did, really.
Parents are facing
prison to give their
children possibilities,
possibilities that area given
for upper-middle-class and
wealthy families, families that
can exercise their own school
choice because they have
the means to choose what and
where is best for their kids.
As a kid, it didn't occur to
me that using a baby-sitter's
address or an address where
my dad used to live
before the bank took his
property back was wrong.
It was what was required,
do-it-yourself school choice to
make more choices down the road
possible.
And it worked.
The good school my mom got me
into, gave me a great start
for the rest of my education.
I went to a good college.
From there, I had the privilege
of becoming a Fulbright
Scholar, and that helped lead
me to Harvard Business School.
But along the way, I
saw just how narrow the
funnel that leads to the
nation's elite institutions
truly is.
The thing that strikes me
now is that all that I have
had the privilege of learning
and doing and undertaking since
then is because I had a mom
who understood that education
was the best anti-poverty
vaccination she could
give me and the best
shot at class mobility
she had to offer.
For many moms and dads,
school choice is not an
issue, it's not partisan.
It is about possibilities
and a chance to give kids the
springboard they need to vault
over class barriers and toward
the best future they can build.
And that future is
something in which every
one of us has a stake.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Gayle Tzemach
Lemmon, we thank you.
On our Facebook page: How
worried should we be about Lyme
disease and Lyme-carrying ticks?
Our science team spoke with the
director of the John Hopkins
Lyme Disease Clinical Research
Center, and took questions
from our Facebook viewers.
You can find that and more
on Facebook.com/NewsHour.
Robert Costa is preparing
for "Washington Week,"
which airs later tonight.
Robert, what do you have?
ROBERT COSTA: Tonight:
The Russia scandal hits
close to home for the
Trump family, pushing
the White House
into crisis mode.
We talk with the investigative
reporters who broke the story
and about new reports that
a former Russian spy may have
been at that Trump Tower meeting
-- tonight on "Washington
Week," Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
we will be watching.
Thanks.
Coming up tomorrow on
"PBS NewsHour Weekend":
the final installment
of our six-part series
Inside Putin's Russia,
an in-depth look at
rising opposition to
President Vladimir Putin,
led by Alexei Navalny, who is
inspiring young Russians to
speak out against corruption.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The 41-year-old
lawyer is the country's most
prominent opposition politician
on a crusade against corruption.
His rallies are unusual
in a country where
retail campaigning
is almost unheard of.
The crowds are young,
and he talks like them.
ALEXEI NAVALNY, Russian
Opposition Leader
(through translator):
They think we have no
right to ask questions, that
we have to shut up and listen.
But, no, we have gathered here
to say we're going to ask these
questions and we will obtain
the answers.
MAN: His anti-corruption
message resonates with me.
And I think that he's a
very charismatic politician.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's tomorrow
on "PBS NewsHour Weekend."
And we will be back right here
on Monday, when the health
care reform battle will heat
up, as the Congressional Budget
Office is expected to release
its analysis of the latest
Senate bill.
That's the "NewsHour"
for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and good night.